---
layout: "post"
title: "S3 and HDFS"
date: "2020-05-04 11:11"
desc: A short list of the stark divergences between S3 & HDFS
comments: true
series: Data Systems
categories:
  - data-systems
author: Sujith Jay Nair
tags: data-systems
permalink: /s3-hdfs
---
Cluster storage systems have, over the past decade, moved their gold standards from directory-oriented file-systems such as _HDFS_ to object-stores such as _AWS S3_. The two storage models have been dissected & compared over & again from multiple perspectives [^1] [^2]. Again, based on your use-case, you might be more interested in a certain cross-section of differences between _S3_ & _HDFS_ than other differences. I am not trying here to repeat the analyses.

I wrote this short, bullet-style compilation as a quick refresher for myself on ways _S3_ differs from _HDFS_; it is focused on the APIs & interactions _Hadoop_-like data-processing systems (such as _Hadoop_, _Spark_, or _Flink_ ) might have with storage systems.

#### Consistency Model

The _S3_ consistency model promises read-after-write consistency [^3]. The relaxed constraints of this model include:
  - File delete and update operations may not immediately propagate. Old copies of the file may exist for an indeterminate time period.
  - Directory operations: *delete()* and *rename()* are implemented by recursive file-by-file operations. They take time at least proportional to the number of files, during which time partial updates may be visible. If the operations are interrupted, the filesystem is left in an intermediate state.

#### Directory Structure

Also, as an object store, there is no directory structure in _S3_. _Hadoop-S3_ clients mimic directory structure by:
  - Creating a stub entry after a *mkdirs* call, deleting it when a file is added anywhere underneath
  - When listing a directory, searching for all objects whose path starts with the directory path, and returning them as the listing.
  - When renaming a directory, taking such a listing and asking _S3_ to copying the individual objects to new objects with the destination filenames.
  - When deleting a directory, taking such a listing and deleting the entries in batches.
  - When renaming or deleting directories, taking such a listing and working on the individual files.

The consequences include:

  - Directory listing can be slow. [^4]
  - The time to rename a directory is proportional to the number of files underneath it (directory or indirectly) and the size of the files. [^5]
  - Directory renames are not atomic: they can fail partway through, and callers cannot safely rely on atomic renames as part of a commit algorithm.
  - Directory deletion is not atomic and can fail partway through.

#### POSIX-Compliance

The above discussion might give an impression that _HDFS_ is POSIX-compliant. Neither _HDFS_ or _S3_ are POSIX-compliant.

For _HDFS_, append-only semantics are the best known exception, but there are many other.  For example, it also seems to lack support for extended attributes, and does not honour POSIX durability semantics (for instance, it buffers writes at the client when it should not).

#### Footnotes
[^1]: [HDFS vs. Cloud Storage: Pros, Cons and Migration Tips](https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/storage-data-transfer/hdfs-vs-cloud-storage-pros-cons-and-migration-tips).
[^2]: [Top 5 Reasons for Choosing S3 over HDFS](https://databricks.com/blog/2017/05/31/top-5-reasons-for-choosing-s3-over-hdfs.html).
[^3]: [Read-After-Write Consistency in Amazon S3](https://shlomoswidler.com/2009/12/read-after-write-consistency-in-amazon.html).
[^4]: Use *listFiles(path, recursive)* for high performance recursive listings, whenever possible.
[^5]: The copy is executed inside the S3 storage, so the time is independent of the bandwidth from client to S3.
